---
title: End-to-End Testing
sidebar:
  order: 2
---

The test suite utilizes [Selenium](https://selenium.dev/) as the automation architecture, [`tauri-driver`](https://tauri.app/develop/tests/webdriver/) to interface with the Tauri app, [Mocha](https://mochajs.org/) as the testing framework, and [Chai](https://www.chaijs.com/) for assertions.

## Implementation Details

Selenium does not come with a test suite for Tauri out of the gate; it is left to the developer to implement it. We took [Tauri's example test](https://tauri.app/develop/tests/webdriver/example/selenium/#testing) and split it out into a setup file and a driver helper file so that we could split our tests across multiple files. The setup file is used to start `tauri-driver` and the Tauri project itself, and the driver helper file gives each test file access to the driver to be able to run tests through it.

### File Structure

- `e2e-tests/setup.ts` - sets up the testing framework (by building the project and running `tauri-driver`)
- `e2e-tests/helpers/` - helper files that tests can reference for common functionality
	- `driver.ts` - establishes connection between the test and the `tauri-driver` instance
- `e2e-tests/specs/` - the tests to run; indicated by the extension `.spec.ts`
- `.mocharc.json` - configuration file for the Mocha framework
- `src-tauri/tauri.conf.test.json` - special tauri configuration used for the test suite
- `.github/workflows/e2e-tests.yml` - workflow definition for running tests in GitHub Actions

### Challenges

One of the challenges we faced was that the default Tauri build command called the default Vite build command, which involved type checking the frontend. However, the type checker ran into multiple errors that prevented the build from finishing correctly. We solved this by adding an additional command that purely built the frontend for testing purposes, and we also added a special Tauri config file for testing purposes. Additionally, this extra config file also allowed us to limit the test environment to a single window, preventing any issues that could arise from having multiple windows to interact with during testing.

Another challenge was that some tests would attempt to find elements before they were fully loaded, such as before the page loaded or immediately after an action was performed. This was solved by making the webdriver pause briefly upon doing any actions that don't update immediately (such as adding a new mission) before continuing.

When developing the CI workflow for GitHub Actions, we ran into an issue where the frontend refused to compile because it was missing the bindings for TauRPC. We ignore that file, as we expect it to be automatically generated by TauRPC during the development process. However, TauRPC only generates that file if you run Tauri in development mode (i.e `tauri dev`), [as seen in the source code here](https://github.com/MatsDK/TauRPC/blob/1659d0490dbda15cdca60f83b3a2b09cee59838d/taurpc/src/lib.rs#L97-L109) (issue tracked as [#26](https://github.com/MatsDK/TauRPC/issues/26)). To work around this issue, we invoke Tauri in development mode without a working graphical environmnent in the CI and expect it to fail. By doing things this way, we are able to generate the bindings for TauRPC without keeping the development window around, and we also get to keep ignoring the bindings file.

## Running Tests

Right now, `tauri-driver` only supports Windows and Linux systems; it does not support macOS.

If you've freshly cloned the repo, you must first run Tauri in development mode (`bun run tauri dev`) in order to generate the bindings for TauRPC. See [Challenges](#challenges) for further details.

To run the test suite manually, execute `bun run test` in the project root directory.

The test suite also runs on GitHub's runners every time a commit is pushed to the repository. It only runs on a Linux runner, as GitHub's Windows runners do not support running Linux containers due to a lack of nested virtualization support.

## Writing Tests

To write a new test, add a new TypeScript file ending with the `.spec.ts` extension to `e2e-tests/specs`.

Here is an minimal test example you can start from:

```
import { createDriver, baseUrl } from '../helpers/driver.js';
import { expect } from 'chai';
import { By } from 'selenium-webdriver';

describe("My Test Suite", () => {
  let driver;

  before(async () => {
    // Set up the driver
    driver = await createDriver();
    await driver.manage().setTimeouts({ implicit: 2000 });
    // Load page
    await driver.get(baseUrl);
  });

  after(async () => {
    // Stop the driver
    await driver.quit();
  });

  it('should greet the user', async () => {
    const text = await driver.findElement(By.css('body > h1')).getText();
    expect(text).to.equal('Hello!');
  });
});
```

Depending on the screen you want to test, you will need to load one of these following URLs in `await driver.get()`:

- Vehicle Camera Screen: `baseUrl`
- Map Screen: `baseUrl + '/#/StaticScreen'`

### Common Patterns

A major part of writing tests consists of getting elements from the page, doing actions on the webpage (such as clicking), and checking that certain values are within expectations. As such, here is a list of common patterns for these actions and what they do:

- Assertions
	- `expect(foo).to.equal(bar);` - test that a given value `foo` matches another value `bar`
	- `expect(foo).to.not.equal(bar);` - test that a given value `foo` does not match another value `bar`
	- `expect(foo).to.be.true;` - test that a given value `foo` is true
	- `expect(foo).to.be.false;` - test that a given value `foo` is false
	- `expect(foo).to.be.lessThan(bar);` - test that a given value `foo` is less than another value `bar`
	- `expect(foo).to.be.greaterThan(bar);` - test that a given value `foo` is greater than another value `bar`
- Finding Elements
	- `const element = await driver.findElement(By.css('.foo'));` - get the first element matching the given CSS selector
	- `const elementList = await driver.findElements(By.css('.bar'));` - get a list of all elements matching the given CSS selector
- Element Information
	- `const text = element.getText();` - get the rendered text of the given element
	- `const attribute = element.getAttribute('name');` - get the value of a given attribute of the given element
	- `const cssValue = element.getCssValue('color');` - get the specified CSS Value of the given element
- Element Interactions
	- `await element.click();` - click on the given element
	- `await element.sendKeys('Hello World!');` - types the given string into an input field
	- `await element.clear()` - reset the content of an input field
- Miscellaneous
	- `await driver.sleep(duration);` - pause test execution for the given time (in milliseconds)

For more in-depth information on interacting with the webdriver, please visit [Selenium's WebDriver Documentation](https://www.selenium.dev/documentation/webdriver/).

### Looping over Tests

If you'd like to run a similar set of tests to test different parts that have the same structure, you can loop over test cases like such:

```
const testCases = [
  { color: "red", hex: "#ff0000", name: "foo" },
  { color: "green", hex: "#00ff00", name: "bar" },
  { color: "blue", hex: "#0000ff", name: "quux" }
];

testCases.forEach(({ color, hex, name }) => {
  it(`should ensure {name} is {color}`, async () => {
    const element = await driver.findElements(By.css(`#{name}`));
    const elementColor = await element.getCssValue('background-color');
    expect(elementColor).to.equal(hex);
  });
});
```
